Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today
we are discussing genders.
But not whether a person is a
man, a woman, or another gender,
or what pronouns one should use.
But rather, genders in language,
and specifically, we will focus on
genders in the English language.
38% of the world speak a gendered
language, meaning they group
nouns into categories like
masculine, feminine and neuter.
English is something called a “natural
gender language”, meaning that
pronouns - he, she, and so on - do
have a gender, but objects do not.
A chair is a chair, it isn’t masculine,
it isn’t feminine, it’s just a chair.
So why is this?
Why do most European languages
give inanimate objects
genders, but English does not?
Has this always been the case?
And is it really true that
there are no genders in English?
Let’s get right into it and
explore the surprising story behind
genders in the English language.
When speaking about the German language,
the American author Mark Twain once said:
“Every noun has a gender, there is
no sense or system in distribution.”
“In German, a young lady has
no sex, while a turnip has.
Think what overwrought reverence, [or
great love] that shows for the turnip,
and what disrespect for the girl.”
Here, Twain humorously voices his
frustration at trying to understand
the German language and its seemingly
random categorisation of words.
As our German listeners will
know, the German language
has three genders: masculine,
feminine and neuter, or neutral.
The word for a ‘girl’ is neuter , while
the word for ‘turnip’ is feminine.
And Twain points out how strange this
is, at least for an English-speaker,
for a speaker of a language
without grammatical genders.
Why should a turnip have a
gender and a girl have none?
A girl is clearly feminine,
and a turnip is, well, it’s a
vegetable, it’s neither feminine nor
masculine in terms of its gender.
Twain isn’t alone in being baffled,
being confused, by this concept.
It’s a challenging one for anyone
learning a new language, especially if
their native language is a grammatically
non-gendered one, like English.
On the flip side, on the other hand,
it can make English easier to learn
than languages that do have grammatical
genders, because you almost never
need to worry about remembering
what gender an object is in English.
There are a few exceptions, which
we’ll touch on shortly, but as a
general rule, you don’t need to
worry about whether a turnip is
masculine, feminine, or something else.
Or a tomato.
Or a potato.
Or a TV or a chair or a table.
Or any object.
As you’ll know, non-human
objects in English don’t have a
gender, which makes life easy.
So, why is this, why do some
languages have grammatical genders,
and why is English not one of them?
Well, we need to start by addressing the
first question, of why some languages
have genders, before we can get to
the specific question of English.
The first point to underline is that
it helps to try to mentally separate
the idea of grammatical gender from
physical gender, and instead, to think
of grammatical gender more like a
category, or a way of putting different
types of words in different types of
boxes, a way of organising language.
Linguists believe that many
gendered languages stem from
Proto-Indo-European, a language
which existed around 6000 years ago.
This was the ancestor of European
languages and Western and
Southern Asian languages such
as Hindi, Bengali or Kurdish.
And Proto-Indo-European categorised
nouns into two groups: a group for
animate or living things and a group
for inanimate things, or objects.
But over thousands of years many new
languages evolved and the categories for
words changed, becoming far more varied.
Words that had been classed merely
as inanimate in Proto-Indo-European
eventually became either masculine,
feminine or
neuter.
Why?
Well, linguists believe that the
reason for these changes in language
can be attributed to the various
belief systems of countries affecting
how they thought about objects.
For instance, in the Siberian
language Ket, masculine words
are often items actually related
to the culture’s male-dominated
activities like hunting and building.
For instance, their words for
fish and wood are both masculine.
Meanwhile, words for more domestic
things such as illnesses, body parts and
plants are often feminine, reflecting
women’s position that particular society.
So, while these inanimate objects
don’t, of course, have a gender,
in their language their gender
corresponds to the real-life
people most associated with them.
And the influence of real-life gender
is also present in the Alamblak
language of Papua New Guinea.
In Alamblak, many masculine nouns
include the words for snakes, arrows,
and trees, long straight shapes.
I’ll leave you guess
why that one might be.
These examples show how cultural
beliefs can affect language and the
ways we think and interact with words.
And linguists believe that this
sort of thing happening over many
thousands of years slowly led to
the evolution of European languages
and their gender categories.
But as any speaker of Spanish, German,
French, Italian, or any other European
gendered language will know, these
cultural influences are often long gone.
To go back to our example from Mark
Twain, a turnip is feminine in German.
It’s also feminine in Italian, “la rapa”.
But it’s masculine in French [“le
navet”] and in Spanish [“el nabo”].
If there’s a cultural reason why a
turnip should be feminine in German
and Italian but masuline in French and
Spanish, well, I have yet to find it.
Instead, words tend to be categorised
phonetically, words which sound the same.
can be distinguished by
their different genders.
If we use the example of French
or Italian, similar-sounding
words often have the same gender.
In French, for example, words ending
in things like "ant" tend to be
masculine, whereas words ending in -asse,
-ace, or -esse tend to be feminine.
And in Italian, words ending in an
“o” tend to be masculine and words
ending in an “ a” tend to be feminine.
But these are guidelines more
than surefire certain rules, as
any frustrated French or Italian
learner will know all too well.
Interestingly enough, some studies
suggest that grammatical genders do
actually make it quicker and easier
for people to understand information.
In other words, gender in language
can give clues to your brain that
help it retrieve information faster.
For example, I’m sure you’ve had
that annoying, niggling, feeling when
you can’t quite remember the correct
word to describe what you mean.
Well, linguists propose that
grammatical gender can actually help
to eliminate this, with the grammatical
gender providing clues to your
brain to help you retrieve a word.
This is, of course, only one theory, and
there’s an equally valid argument to be
made that genders in language make it
more complicated to learn a language.
After all, the most successful artificial
language in history, Esperanto, completely
avoided gendered language altogether, with
its creator believing that any benefits
that gender might have once you had
learned the language were outweighed by
the additional mental energy required to
learn these genders in the first place.
So, this brings us to English,
a non-gendered language.
Why doesn’t it have grammatical genders,
especially considering that there is so
much European influence in the language?
Well, it hasn’t always been this way.
It might surprise you to find out
that up until the 11th century or so,
English did have grammatical genders.
Old English, or Anglo Saxon, had
genders, every object was either
masculine, feminine or neutral.
This language had been brought to the
British Isles by the Saxons, who came from
Northern Europe in the fourth century AD.
After they settled in the South of
England, Anglo Saxon quickly became the
dominant language spoken in the British
Isles, so most people in Britain were
speaking using grammatical gender.
But just as one group of Northern
European invaders brought genders
with them, another group of Northern
Europeans appeared several centuries
later, and unintentionally wiped out
the existence of genders in English.
These were the Vikings.
Now, you probably know the Vikings
as fearsome warriors, bringing
with them a reign of terror.
But they also brought with them
their language, Old Norse, when
they started to settle in Britain
in the late ninth century.
Old Norse, like Anglo
Saxon, did have genders.
It had masculine, feminine and neuter.
The problem was that the genders
given to objects weren’t always
the same in the two languages.
A turnip might have been
feminine in Old English but
masculine or neuter in Old Norse.
Clearly, this made life confusing.
So, over time, people in Northern
England, where the Vikings first
landed, started to leave out the
gendered parts of their language.
And this trend slowly travelled down to
the Anglo-Saxon south of England, and by
the 11th century grammatical genders in
English had, by and large, disappeared.
A turnip became just a turnip.
But there are some exceptions, some
objects still do have genders in
English, or at least, semi-genders.
Now, this is not something you would learn
in an English class, but it’s interesting.
And this is the concept
of metaphorical gender.
For example, boats are often referred
to as “she”, they are feminine.
If you were talking about the
Titanic, let’s say, you could
say “she set sail to America”.
You could also say “it set sail for
America”, which wouldn’t be completely
wrong, but it would sound very strange
to say “he set sail for America”.
So, a boat is either "it" or
it's "she", it's never “he”.
Interestingly enough, one theory about
why this is, at least in the case of
boats, is that it comes from the Latin
word for boat, navis, which is feminine.
Another is that  there is this idea of a
boat having a protective, maternal role
for its crew, or rather, her crew, and
that’s why boats are often given a gender.
By the way, it’s not wrong at all to call
a boat simply “it”, and indeed the Lloyds
Register of Shipping, which knows a thing
or two about boats, calls a ship “it”.
And it’s not just ships that
get given genders in English.
Cars and machines are often feminine
in English, but typically only when
the person talking about them has some
kind of close relationship with them.
All that being said, this is a pretty
niche, unusual, way of speaking, so for
all intents and purposes, it is safe
to assume that there are no genders
used to describe objects in English.
There are, of course, still gendered
terms used to describe people.
Now, this is perhaps controversial
territory we’re getting into here,
but the English language historically
has male and female pronouns that are
used to describe people - he/him, and
she/her, with the third person plural,
they, being used when the gender of
a person is unspecified or unknown.
And in English, nouns describing
the job someone does have
historically been slightly different
depending on that person's gender.
Headmaster or Headmistress.
Policeman or Policewoman.
Actor or Actress.
Waiter or Waitress.
In most cases, the male variant
is the dominant one, and the
female version is an alternative.
Clearly, this is problematic.
If a young girl only hears about
policemen, or firemen, or postmen
or businessmen, or even if a young
boy hears these terms as standard,
it suggests that these are things
that can only be done by men.
Over the past few decades, there has
been a move to try to standardise
these terms in English, to try
to create more inclusive language
In some cases, the male variant is
chosen as the standard, so there
are, for example, no longer actors
and actresses, simply “actors”.
In other cases, a new, non-gendered term
is chosen, so there aren’t Policemen and
Policewomen, but rather police officers.
All good so far.
Perhaps even more strangely, in American
English a decision has been taken to
change the Spanish language, when used
in English, so someone is no longer
Latino or Latina, they are Latinx.
The idea of creating an inclusive
term does, it appears, come
from a place of good intentions.
But this particular example of
“Latinx” has largely been ridiculed
by the Hispanic population.
Only 2-3% of Hispanic people reportedly
use the term to describe themselves,
and it has been criticised as an
example of linguistic imperialism, of
non-Spanish-speaking Americans changing
Spanish to solve a non-existent problem.
And as to the question of what is
the effect of a language having
grammatical gender or not, and what
is the effect of English having
gendered pronouns but not grammatical
gender, well this is a tricky one.
There was a prominent study from 2011 that
looked at gender equality in 111 different
countries and found that countries where
gendered languages were spoken tended
to have lower levels of gender equality.
So, if you live in a country that
assigns genders to objects, you are more
likely to experience gender inequality.
You might think, well, if that’s the case,
then presumably countries with no gender
in their language would be beacons of
gender equality, would be great places in
terms of equality between men and women.
Some, Finland, for example,
score very highly on this count.
Finnish is a language without any genders,
neither grammatical nor in personal
pronouns, and Finland is a country
with high levels of gender equality.
Others, Cameroon, China and
Turkey, for example, do not.
These countries don’t use gendered
language, but they don’t score very
well in terms of gender equality.
Interestingly, countries where Natural
Gender languages like English are
spoken, where pronouns have gender
but objects do not, score highest
overall, they are generally the best
places in terms of gender equality.
Clearly, the language spoken in the
country is only one factor here, but
it is certainly an interesting piece
of research, and shows that even if
your language has no inbuilt gender
inequality, it certainly doesn’t mean that
this will be the case for your society.
So, what does this all
mean for English learners?
Well, not a lot, really..
The good news for you is that
grammatical gender is one less
thing you need to worry about.
When you talk about a turnip, call it it.
When you talk about a
chair, call it “it” too.
And when you’re talking about
a boat, well the truth is that
you can call it “it” as well.
Ok then, that is it for today’s
episode on gender in language, and
in particular, gender in English.
I hope it was an interesting one, and
that it might have left you thinking
a bit about your native language.
Did you grow up speaking a grammatically
gendered language like French or Spanish,
a non-gendered language like Turkish
or Mandarin, or a naturally gendered
language like English, Danish or Swedish?
How do you think this affected you,
and the society you grew up in?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.